what is a configuration management tool or Ansible? 
it's an open source configuration management tool. it also helps to simplify complex problems and to automate repetitive work, which is faster and efficient. 

2. Difference between ansible and other tools.
Ansible is agent less. Yaml syntax. 

3. what is ansible plabook.
its yaml file, it has set of instruction which has to exicute om managed nodes. we can automate complex management like configuration management or deploying application. 

4. Inventory in Ansible?
It has a set of info about managed nodes and group them. iventory -i

5. concept of idempotence?
it generally maintains the state of the system. it check current state wth desired state.

6. Ansible roles?
To reduce the complexity of playbook, or if want to reuse then we will go with role. there is a directory strcture it follows.
TASK, variables, default, handelers, files, templates, jinja2 in a directory structure.

7. Adhoc commands and playbook
adhoc is for one time task, playbook is a kind of automating repetative task. we want to excute multiple time.

8. How do you handle sensitive data?
Ansible has Ansible Vault, Env variable or external vault Harshi corp vault

9. purpose of ansible galaxy?
It is a hub, find, share, and reuse roles playbook, and these can be reused whenever needed. It's kind of a centralized repository for community content.
ansible-galaxy init my_role

10. what is ansible tower?
It's a GUI web-based tool. It has a dashboard. It has RBAC (role-based access control). Schedule jobs. centralize login macanizium. 
We can remove dependencies so anyone can execute. Ansible credential vault we can use in playbook.
Ansible tower provides built in support for managing secrets and sensitive data using credentials managing features. 
you can store the credentials such as ssh key, password and API tokens securly in tower credential vaults and referece them in playbook
and job templates without exposing them in plain text.

11. How to debug?
verbose -vvvv it gives detailed output. Also, we can use a dry run. Asible-playbook playbookname -C

12. Ansible facts.
Info about managed nodes is collected by Ansible about managed nodes. like which os, IP address, hardware, and custom info used by managed nodes. ex: we want to run the playbook in Windows
Gather Facts Manually - ansible all -m setup 
- hosts: all
  gather_facts: true
  gather_subset:
    - network
    - hardware

13. Handling error
it support error handling, ignore_errors, failed_when, and block statements. Log error messages and take appropriate actions based on the output.
Continue execution even if the task fails.
- name: Try to stop a service (ignore if not running)
  ansible.builtin.systemd:
    name: apache2
    state: stopped
  ignore_errors: yes

This fails the task only when disk is 100% full, even if the command itself succeeded.
- name: Check disk space
  command: df -h /
  register: disk_result
  failed_when: "'100%' in disk_result.stdout"

Technique	              Purpose
ignore_errors       	  Skip failure and continue playbook
failed_when	            Define custom failure logic
block/rescue - always 	Try/catch-style structured error handling
assert	                Explicitly fail if a condition is false
when	                  Skip task based on a condition

14. What is RBAC?
as an admin, we can define granular permissions to different users/teams. Only authorized users can log in, mainly to enhance security. 

15. Integrate Ansible with other tools?
plugins, API, and webhooks. Git, jenkins and Prometheus, and graphana. 

Advanced interview questions.
1. what are ansible vault? how they manage sensitive data?
they encrypt sensitive data (passwords, ssh keys or any api's). we can use ansible-vault to create encrypted data and reference it in a playbook 
using --ask-vault-pass or by storing vault pass in the file.

2. what are ansible collections?
AC are the collection like role, modules, playbook, plugin and those distributed through Ansible Galaxy and also private repo. 
Unlike role, it allows versioning, dependency management and distribution of reusable automation content across projects.

3. how we can implement multienvironment deployment using ansible.
we can make use of inventory file for defining different env ( dev, prepod and prod). 
Dynamic inventory plugins and group variables for flexible environment management. 
variables and configuration settings to customise these env, 

4. Strategies to test playbooks and roles?
Ansible playbooks and roles can tested using tools like Ansible-lint (syntax error), 
Molecule -  automates the testing across different platforms like docker or vagrant. molecule create/converge/verify/test
test infra -  used to perform integration testing by verifying expected system state changes. 

5. How to we implemet blue-green ?
blue green deployement can be implemented in ansible by maintaing two indetical environments by switching traffic between load balancer
it automate the deployment process include providing, configuring and updating infrastucture companents for both env.

6. How to handle rolling updates and zero down time deployments?
using strategies such as serial execution and health checks and service monitoring.
Ansible playbook can automate the process of updating infrastucture components one by one while ensuing that services remain available and
responsive throught the deployment process. 

7. What are Ansible Tower job templates, and how do you use them to automate tasks?
Ansible Tower job templates are reusable configurations for running Ansible playbooks or ad-hoc commands on managed hosts.
They allow you to define the playbook, inventory, credentials and other parameters needed to execute tasks,
making it easy to automate routine operations and workflows in Tower's web interface or through API calls.

8. Explain how you can orchestrate complex workflows and dependencies using Ansible Tower workflows.
tower allow to orchestrate complex automation workflow with dependencies and conditional logic and manual approvals.
Workflows can chain together multiple job templates, running tasks in parallel or sequentially and waiting for user input or
external trigger before proceeding to the next step.
This enable you to automate end-to-end process and stream line IT operation effecintly. 


Senario based 
🔹 Question 1: You need to provision a new server instance on AWS with Ansible. How would you approach this task?
The playbook would specify the desired instance type, region, security group and other configuration. also, tags and ssh key pairs

🔹 Question 2: You have multiple web servers running Apache, and you need to ensure that a specific configuration file is consistent across all servers. How would you achieve this with Ansible?
I would create ansible role that has tasks template the configuration file with variables, distribute to all webservers and maintain desired state. restart services when ever needed.

🔹 Question 3: Your team is deploying a new version of a web application across multiple servers. How would you use Ansible to automate the deployment process?
ansible playbook that pulls the latest version of the application from version control & copy it to the target server and perform necessary configuration updates.
playbook/role tasks would used to stop the existing application & deploy new version and start the updated application ensuring smooth and consistent deployment process.

🔹 Question 4: You want to perform rolling updates to a group of servers without causing downtime. How would you implement this using Ansible?
Ansible serial keyword and setting the desired number or percentage to update number of servers simultaneously. Ansible would update one by one or small batche ensuring application 
ramins available though out the update process.
- hosts: webservers
  serial: 2      # Run tasks on 2 hosts at a time
  tasks:
    - name: Update package cache
      apt:
        update_cache: yes


🔹 Question 5: You have a load balancer that needs to be updated with the IP addresses of newly provisioned servers. How would you automate this task with Ansible?
Ansible playbook that dynamically retrive ip address of the new servers and updates the load balancer configuration accordingly. plugin - plugin: aws_ec2 or scriprt
playbook would use ansible ec2_instance_facts module to gather information about the provisined instance and then use module to update load balancer configuration.

🔹 Question 6: Your organization requires regular security patching of servers. How would you automate the process using Ansible?
play book that uses apt or yum module to install security updates on the machines. Playbook specify the necessary package to be updated and would run periodically using 
Ansible shceduling or integrated with cicd pipepline to ensure timely oatching of servers. 

🔹 Question 7: You need to automate the backup of a MySQL database running on multiple servers. How would you accomplish this with Ansible?
Ansible playbook that connects each db server execute a mysql dump command to create a backup of data base and trasfer a backup file to designated backup server or storage location.
This playbook would be scheduled to run regulalry to ensure that database backups are performed consistently.
mysqldump -u root -p mydatabase > backup.sql $(date +%y-%m%d)
Method	          How to use
-p with prompt	  mysqldump -u user -p db > backup.sql
~/.my.cnf config	Put creds in file, secure it, then mysqldump db > backup.sql

🔹 Question 8: In the event of a disaster, you need to restore a critical application to a previous state using Ansible. How would you implement this?
Ansible playbook that retrives the necessary configuration files from backup storage and deployes them to the target servers. This playbook would also include tasks to restore
database backups and other dependencies ensuing that the application is fully recovered to its pervious state.

🔹 Question 9: You have separate development, staging, and production environments, each with different configuration settings. How would you manage deployments across these environments using Ansible?
in Ansible inventory we can define separate groups for each environment and specofi environment specific variables in playbooks. 
by parametarizing the task and leveraging the dynamic inventory, i can ensure that deployment are tailored to each env requirement while maintaining the consistency accross env.

🔹 Question 10: You need to configure a high availability setup for a critical application using Ansible. How would you approach this task?
Ansible playbook provision the redundent infrstructure components such as load balancer auto scaling groups and database clusters across multiple availability zones and regions.
playbook would include taks to configure failover machanisum, health checks and monitoring alerts to ensure continuos availability and resilience of application.

🔹 Question 11: You're managing a Docker Swarm cluster and need to deploy a new service across multiple nodes. How would you orchestrate this deployment with Ansible?
pkaybook which interact with cluster API to deploy the new specification to the cluster. Playbook would include tasks yo scale a service, configuration settings and manage service
updates ensuring that the service deployed efficiently across swarm.

🔹 Question 12: You're responsible for managing a Kubernetes cluster and need to automate routine maintenance tasks. How would you use Ansible for cluster management?
playbook that utilize the kub modules or command line tools to perform task such as node provisions, pod deployments. configuration updates and cluster scaling.
by abstractiong kub operations to ansible tasks, i can automate cluster management task and ensure consistency configuration entire cluster.

🔹 Question 13: Your organization needs to ensure compliance with security policies and regulatory requirements. How would you use Ansible to perform compliance checks?
Ansible playbook that exicute security scanns and configuration audits and complains checks againest predefined bench mark of policies.
Palybook would use ansible built in modules or custom scripts to assess the state of managed systems and report by deviations from the desired configuration.
Enabling remediation actions to bring systems into complains. 

🔹 Question 14: Your organization is migrating workloads from on-premises data centers to the cloud. How would you orchestrate the migration process with Ansible?
We can provision cloud resources  and configuration of network settings and deployment of application workloads in the target cloud env using playbook.
By abstracting infrastucture operations into ansible task, I can ensure consistent deployment patteren and streamline the migration process acriss multiple env.

🔹 Question 15: You want to implement self-healing capabilities for critical systems using Ansible. How would you design and deploy self-healing workflows?
playbook monitor system health and performence metricks, detect anomilies  or failures and trigger automated remediation actions to restore service availability.
By integrating Ansible with monitoring and alerting systems, I can orchestrate self- healing workflows that proactively respond to incidents nad minimize downtime,
esurinh continous operation of critical systems. 

Another set of senario based

1. How to limit ansible run for a single machine only?
using flags - ansible-playbook site.yaml --limit "dev.com" / "host1,host2"

2. How to ignore ansible authenticity checking?
set anvironment variables below to false: Ansible_host_hey_checking
set parameter in ansible.cfg file - defaults - host_key_cehcking=false

3.How to run one task in anisble playbook - using tags

4.Is there default variable which contains the playbook absolute path?
Variable playbook_dir can be used to get the absolute path of the playbook directory path/

5. different forms if defing ssh key.
in playbook we can specify ssh hey file using --key-file on th command line
we can slo use variable inside inventory or host vars - ansible_ssh_private_key_file.

6. difference between vars and default in ansible role directory structure.
var is the high proirty than defaults.

7. how do I get log details for ansible playbook execution?
give this in ansible configuration file - log_path= /path/tp/logfile
or we can use -vvvv

Ansible interview questions by chat gpt

 Basic Ansible Interview Questions
What is Ansible and how does it work?

What are the advantages of using Ansible?

What is an inventory file in Ansible?

What is a playbook in Ansible?

What is the difference between a playbook and an ad-hoc command?

How does Ansible connect to remote hosts?

What is YAML and why is it used in Ansible?

What are modules in Ansible? Name a few commonly used ones.

What is the Ansible configuration file and where is it located?

What is the difference between copy and template modules?

⚙️ Intermediate Ansible Interview Questions
How do variables work in Ansible?

What are facts in Ansible and how can you use them?

What is the purpose of handlers in Ansible?

What are roles in Ansible and why are they useful?

What are Ansible Galaxy and its use cases?

How do you implement error handling in Ansible playbooks?

How do you pass variables at runtime in Ansible?

What is idempotency in Ansible and why is it important?

How can you run only specific tasks from a playbook?

How do you encrypt sensitive data in Ansible?

Using Ansible Vault

🧠 Advanced Ansible Interview Questions
How does Ansible compare to other tools like Puppet or Chef?

What are dynamic inventories and how do you use them?

How do you use loops in Ansible?

How can you make a task run only when a certain condition is met?

How do you manage environments (dev, staging, prod) in Ansible?

Explain Ansible's execution flow.

How do you manage secrets in a secure and scalable way using Vault or HashiCorp Vault with Ansible?

How do you handle dependencies between roles or tasks?

What is block and how is it different from tasks?

How would you scale Ansible for 5000+ nodes in production?

📦 Scenario-Based Ansible Interview Questions
You need to deploy an application on multiple servers, but each server has a slightly different configuration. How would you manage this in Ansible?

Use host/group variables or include conditional logic in tasks.

You have a playbook that installs Apache and starts the service. How would you make sure it only restarts if the configuration file changes?

Use notify with a handler.

Your playbook keeps failing halfway through. How would you debug and fix it?

Use -vvv, --start-at-task, and --step flags, check error messages, use debug module.

You need to execute a task only if a file exists on the remote server. How would you do this in Ansible?

Use when with stat module.

How would you structure your Ansible project for a microservices-based application with 5+ components?

Use roles, one per service; create environment-specific variable directories; manage secrets via vault.

You need to provision cloud resources and configure them afterward. How would you do this with Ansible?

Use Ansible with cloud modules (e.g., amazon.aws.ec2, google.cloud.gce) for provisioning and follow up with configuration roles.












